---
layout: lesson
title: Lesson 2 Building our First Robot
suggested_time:
    - 60 - 75 minutes
disciplines:
    - "3-5-ETS1-1. Define a simple design problem reflecting a need or a want that includes specified criteria for success and constraints on materials, time, or cost."
    - "ETS1.A: Defining and Delimiting Engineering Problems: Possible solutions to a problem are limited by available materials and resources (constraints). The success of a designed solution is determined by considering the desired features of a solution (criteria). Different proposals for solutions can be compared on the basis of how well each one meets the specified criteria for success or how well each takes the constraints into account. (3-5-ETS1-1)"
    - "3-5-ETS1-3. Plan and carry out fair tests in which variables are controlled and failure points are considered to identify aspects of a model or prototype that can be improved."
    - "ETS1.C: Optimizing the Design Solution: Different solutions need to be tested in order to determine which of them best solves the problem, given the criteria and the constraints. (3-5-ETS1-3)"
    - "Science is a Human Endeavor: Most scientists and engineers work in teams. (4-PS3-4)"
technical_skills:
    - Design
    - Mechanics
    - Servo Motors
life_skills:
    - Teamwork
    - Community
essential_questions:
    - What is necessary of all community members to achieve a common goal?  
    - Why do we need one another?  
    - Why is it important to work together?  
    - What is the benefit of it?

vocab:
    - Servo motor
    - Arduino board
    - Battery
videos:
    link: https://youtu.be/haUCJdHcrOc
    text: How To Use The Servo Tester
    link: https://youtu.be/-K1fE6fdUIw
    text: Shove or Sweep or Tip
    link: https://youtu.be/RM-__kgLIhk
    link: https://youtu.be/3EYNjyEtKho
    link: https://youtu.be/ZlEpG98o4Is
    link: https://youtu.be/b37fPzDEjO8
    text: ehh whatever
documents:
other:
depth:
- Level 1:  Recall and Reproduction
- Level 2:  Skills and Concepts
- Level 3:  Strategic Thinking and Reasoning
- Level 4:  Extended Thinking
barriers:
    - Lack of fine motor skills  
    - Minimal understanding of angles and force  
    - Lack of teamwork  
anticipatory:
    - We will build a simple robot using everyday materials.  
    - Students see the function of a servo motor (it moves 180 degrees). Ideally, projected under document camera.  
    - Objective of the challenge: For ALL teams to knock the cup placed 8" away from the robot off the edge of the table  
    - Setting of norms for collaboration within the team and with other teams  

practice:
assessment:
    - Ability of the robot to knock the plastic cup placed 8" away from the robot off the edge of the table  
    - Understanding 180 degrees of movement  
    - Reading a ruler to 8" (not centimeters)  
    - Students are not necessarily using all materials - they may share with other groups  
materials:
- Barnabas Lesson 2 worksheet
- A Ziploc bag of recycled materials for each group (materials vary from group to group).  For example:
    - Masking tape
    - Pipe cleaners
    - Strips of paper
    - Paper clips
    - Clothes pins
    - Popsicle sticks
    - Pennies
    - 1 Servo motor per group
    - 1 Arduino board for every 3-4 groups of 3-4 students (groups must share)
    - 9-Volt battery 
    - 1 Plastic cup for every 3-4 groups of 3-4 students (to be knocked over; groups must share)
    - 1 Ruler for every 3-4 groups of 3-4 students (must share)
    - Writing utensils
    - Optional: document camera

reflection:
    comprehension: "✎ :  What are the similarities and differences between robots and humans?"
    challenges: blank
    enjoyment: is this the same for all lessons?
    mindset: growth
    community:
        - list
        - of
        - questions
---

Keep multiple: ways of representation, ways of action and expression, and methods of engagement in mind.  
Welcome students to the community building environment (ie. students sitting in a circle)  
Describe the goal of today: build a robot out of recycled materials  
Review the four parts of a robot and how it relates to the human body  
Introduce the parts that will be used today to build the robot (items in the bag, Arduino board/controller, battery,   servo motor)
Demonstrate and explain the movement of a servo motor. Ask the students: What are the possible functions of a servo   motor? Of what is the servo motor capable?  
Demonstrate the Arduino board and explain the code that has been written/programmed to direct the movement   
Rules of the challenge:
There is only one Arduino board, one plastic cup, and one ruler for every 3-4 groups to test their robot’s functionality  
Each group has different additional materials in their supply bag  
Items can be shared amongst groups  
Go over norms for collaboration  
Separate students into multiple groups of 3-4 students and provide each group with a bag  
Give 5 minutes for groups to look over their materials and create individual designs  
Give students 20 minutes to work within their groups to design and create a robot  
Gather all robots at a common place to showcase each group’s completed robot  
Closing circle/debrief - Discuss the EQ of the day.  

### Schoology
#### Explain the Goal
Your team will be given a servo motor that spins half a circle (or 180 degrees).
Your team will also be given a kit of parts. 
Your job will be to work together to build a robot that can hit a cup that is 8 inches away.
Each kit of parts is different, so you’ll probably need to share parts. 
We have a common goal of all groups succeeding, so remember to work together!

#### Thinking on your own.
Look at your parts and think about how you can build a robot to achieve the challenge.  Write down your ideas.

#### Collaborate.
Share your design with your team and come up with a design that you would like to build together as a team.

#### Additional Robot Challenges
Build a robot that can launch a ping pong ball into a cup that is 8 inches away
Build your own robot using the servo and servo tester.  Maybe you can even combine motors and parts to create the ultimate robot!

Explain the main robot parts
The body: Each group will be givin a bag of household items.  The kids will need to be creative to use these items to accomplish a goal.
Servo motor: This is a common motor used in hobby robotics.  We use it to turn things to specific places.  Ask the kids how many degrees is in a circle (360 degrees).  Explain that the servo motor moves a total amount of half a circle (180 degrees)
Arduino/LittleBits controller: This is the brain of the robot that will be controlling the movement of the motor.
9V Battery: This is the part that powers the robot.
Demonstrate the motor moving back and forth by connecting the servo motor, arduino/littleBits controller and the 9V Battery.
Robot make-up review: Take this opportunity to review the 4 main parts of the robot. Have the kids think about which one is the heart, body, brain and soul.
Body = Household Items
Heart = Battery
Arduino = Brain
Soul = You can't see it, but it is the program that is on brain.  It tells the motor when to spin, and how much to spin.
The goal: Use the parts that you are given within your team to build a robot that will hit a cut that is 8 inches away from the center of your robot.  They can only use the materials provided, and their robot must be able to stand up on it's own.
The ultimate goal: Explain that we have a common goal of all groups succeeding.  Not all robot kits are the same, so they will probably need to share parts.  This is an opportunity for the kids to explore friendly competition and collaboration.
Break the kids up into teams of 2-3.
Hand out the little robot kits.  Each team will household parts and Servo Motor (Body).  Explain that the teacher will plug in the heart and the brain when they are done with their design.
Design Process
Explain the difference between design and build.  Build = to physically build something.  Design = Plan what you build.  Would we build a house without planning?  Probably not!
Explain the role of design. (1) To make things beautiful (2) To make things functional
Based on what parts they have, and the goal that they need to acheive, have the kids start planning their design.  They can first work individually, and then collaborate within their group.
Build Process
Now that the design is complete, give the kids time to start building.  
You can periodically have the kids bring their design up to test with the brain and battery.  Encourage them to provide a hypothesis of what will happen before you activate your robot, and ask them to observe what actually happens.  Before they leave, have the kids walk through what they believe they need to do in order to improve their robot. 

#### Showcase
Have the groups present how they designed their robot and overcame their unexpected challenges.
Turn on their motors and see if they acheive the challenge!
If you have more time, you can have the kids try to improve their robot to see if 


## Worksheet 2 – Building our First Robot

### STEP 1: Our first robot challenge!
We are going to work together to build a robot out of household items  
Your team will be given a servo motor that spins 180 degrees (half a circle)  
Your team will also be given a bag of household items  
Your job will be to work together to build a robot that can hit a plastic cup that is 8 inches away off the edge of the table  
Each bag contains different items, so you may need to share parts with other groups   
We have a common goal of all groups succeeding, so remember to work together  

### STEP 2: Robot review
🗨: What are the 4 main parts of a robot?  
✎: Fill in the blanks below:  
The things in the bag and the servo motor are the robot’s ________________________  
The Arduino controller is the robot’s _______________________________________  
The battery is the robot’s ________________________________________________  
The program on the Arduino is the robot’s ___________________________________  

### STEP 3: Designing your first robot
🗨 ✎ : Look at your parts together and think about how you can build a robot to achieve the challenge. Individually, write or draw your robot design with the materials provided.

### STEP 4: Designing our first robot
🗨 ✎ : Share your design with your team and come up with a common design that you would like to build together.

### STEP 5: Build it
Every team member participates in the building process  
Discuss ideas and modifications respectfully  
Test it out with the Arduino board  

### STEP 6: Final robot design
✎ or : Draw your group’s final robot design and describe how the materials were used. Did you borrow any items from (an)other group(s)?  

___

## Reflection
### Comprehension
🗨 or ✎: What did you learn about servo motors?  
🗨 or ✎: Why is design important?  
🗨 or ✎: What did you learn about building your robot’s body?  
### Challenges
Did your final robot look exactly like your design?  
If it is different, explain how it is different.  
### Enjoyment
### Mindset
### Community
🗨 or ✎: Did you work well as a team?  Why or why not?  
🗨 or ✎: Did you work well with other teams?  Why or why not?  
What did you learn about teamwork through this activity?  


## Supporting Materials
Demonstrate the function of the servo motor with a popsicle stick attached to one end of the servo turnstile  
Let students observe other groups  